So we saw document create element which is really useful for creating DOM objects with which we then
can interact
and we did insert it with append child,
nothing wrong with that but there also is append.
The difference is not only that append is shorter but that append also does not only take our new li
which we created but that here you can also add a string, some text for example which is then inserted
as a text node next to the other element nodes,
so if you want to insert a text node you can conveniently do it like this. Another difference by the
way is that you can add multiple nodes here, simply separated by commas as multiple arguments to
append to add multiple nodes at once in that place,
that's also a difference to append child.
Now it is worth mentioning that if you google for js append to find the MDN entry on that, that
if you scroll down to the browser support table there, that Internet Explorer, no version of it supports
append. Edge does and Safari and all other browsers
but if you need to support older versions of Internet Explorer, you might prefer append child
but that really depends on the user base you're targeting, if that's not an issue for you, then you can
absolutely use append instead of append child, otherwise append child has been there for longer and is
simply safer to be used. In the browser support module later down the course, you'll also learn how to
make features like this work in older browsers, like Internet Explorer which would normally not support
it.
So that was append and append child,
we also got more.
So again let me get access here to our unordered list and let's create a new li, a new list item, however
you want to call it with document create element as you learned, li is the tag name and now there,
we can add a text content of item 4 since I reloaded this page,
the old one which I added is gone and now we can of course append new li as you learned,
but let's say we want to insert it as the first element,
well then we can use prepend. So we can call prepend, new li, hit enter and now item 4 is actually
the first element.
Now just as before, searching for js or MDN prepend is helpful to get the official article and
scroll down to the browser support table to learn that here again, Internet Explorer does not support
this,
so with the same thing as with append, this is not necessarily supported. Still, to show you a couple of other
methods
and one other interesting behaviour,
let's say we decide we actually want to use it somewhere else,
we want to add it before the currently last list item. Now we can get access to that with list and then
last element child,
right?
That gives us access to the last list item in the list
and now I want to add the new list item, item 4 which I already did add but I want to add it again let's
say in front of item 3. Now for that, I can now call before here and I can pass a new li here or
as many nodes as I want to insert before the selected last element child,
so item 3 in this case. If I hit enter, item four is added there
but the interesting thing we see here is that item 4 is now actually removed from the beginning of the
list and basically moved into this place.
If you have an element selected, either because you selected it in the DOM with query selector or
because you created it with create element and that element is already part of the DOM,
so it is already rendered, if you then insert it somewhere else,
this is not copied or anything like that,
instead the existing element is detached from the place where it was and moved to the new place and
I guess this actually makes a lot of sense since objects are reference values as you learned and the
DOM objects you're working here are nothing but normal objects in the end and therefore if we do something
with it and we add it somewhere else, we always work with the same object, so of course it's detached from
the existing place and moved to the new one, it's just something to be aware of. If you want a brand new
one, you have to create a brand new one with document create element. Now and of course, you don't just
have before, you also have after to insert it after this selected element unsurprisingly and you also
have replace with,
so if I select let's say in this case the first element child and then I use replace with and replace
this with new li,
then you see item 1 is now dropped actually because replace does not swap it, it just replaces the
element with it, which means it gets rid of the old one and replaces it with a new one and therefore
the old item one is replaced with item four.
So these are different ways of inserting this in different places, important - append, before, after and
so on, they all take multiple nodes if you want, so you can absolutely say append new li and some other
item which you might have created.
They also take strings, so text nodes if you want to but most of the time, you'll use them with single
elements and then they simply give you a lot of flexibility and control over where this element should
be inserted,
just keep in mind that inserting the same element multiple times will move it because we're working
with objects here and not with some automatically copied things.
Now one word about before and after,
if you search for it on MDN and you again check the browser support table, you'll see that here we actually
also have a problem with Safari.
So whereas append and prepend work on Safari and only don't work on Internet Explorer, before and after
also have problems on Safari,
so there you want to be even more careful for whether you want to use that or not and maybe find different
ways of inserting elements than with before and after.
Now what would be such a different way of inserting an element in a specific position if you want to insert
an element let's say after item 2 which you can't really do with append child or so on or anything like
that.
Well for that, you might want to select the element you're interested in, in this case my second list item,
that could be found on children and then index 1,
right,
that gives me the second item,
so second li is now stored in there and now if I create a new list item and I reloaded this page so
that I can create that all again from scratch and I create a new list item here and I set new li
text content to item 4 and I want to insert this after this second li, well then of course the most
convenient way would be to use second li after
but again, support for that on Safari is not that great.
So if we want to avoid it, then you have another useful method, list.insertAdjacentElement.
If we have a look at this on MDN, then we see, just like insert adjacent HTML,
these are the strings we can use
and browser support is way better.
So now here, we could insert this inside of the list or since we want to insert it next to the second
li, we can just go to that and call insert adjacent element where is after end, if we want to insert
it after this one because as you can see here in MDN, after end inserts element after the element
you selected, so after the second li and then here, it's the new li which we want to insert and now
item 4 is inserted after that second element. So insert adjacent element, whilst being a bit longer than
after and before is the safer way of doing this, of inserting elements after or before other elements since
it has better browser support. So that's also something you should be aware of.